BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023 (BNS 2023)
A Bill to consolidate and amend the provisions relating to offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

CHAPTER I — PRELIMINARY

Section 1: Short title, commencement and application.
(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.
(4) Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an offence committed beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Sanhita.
(5) The provisions of this Sanhita apply also to any offence committed by:
  (a) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
  (b) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;
  (c) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a computer resource located in India.

Section 2: Definitions.
(1) "act" — a series of acts as well as a single act;
(2) "animal" — any living creature, other than a human being;
(3) "counterfeit" — A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes one thing to resemble another thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practice deception;
(4) "Court" — a Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of Judges;
(5) "death" — the death of a human being unless the contrary appears from the context;
(6) "dishonestly" — doing of an act with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another;
(7) "document" — any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, intended to be used as evidence of that matter;
(8) "fraudulently" — A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to defraud;
(9) "gender" — the pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male, female or transgender;
(10) "good faith" — Nothing is said to be done or believed in "good faith" which is done or believed without due care and attention;
(11) "Government" — the Central Government or a State Government;
(12) "harbour" — includes supplying a person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance;
(13) "injury" — any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property;
(14) "illegal" — applicable to everything which is an offence or which is prohibited by law;
(15) "Judge" — a person who is officially designated as a Judge;
(16) "life" — the life of a human being;
(17) "local law" — a law applicable only to a particular part of India;
(18) "man" — male human being of any age;
(19) "mental illness" — as defined in section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
(20) "month" and "year" — reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar;
(21) "movable property" — property of every description, except land and things attached to the earth;
(22) "oath" — includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath;
(23) "offence" — an act made punishable by this Sanhita;
(24) "omission" — single omission as well as a series of omissions;
(25) "person" — includes any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not;
(26) "public" — includes any class of the public or any community;
(27) "public servant" — includes officers of Government, judges, officers of courts, members of panchayats, arbitrators, officers empowered to keep persons in confinement, officers whose duty is to prevent offences, election officers, and persons in service or pay of Government or local authority;
(28) "reason to believe" — sufficient cause to believe that thing but not otherwise;
(29) "special law" — a law applicable to a particular subject;
(30) "valuable security" — a document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or released;
(31) "vessel" — anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or property;
(32) "voluntarily" — A person causes an effect "voluntarily" when he causes it by means whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which he knew or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it;
(33) "will" — any testamentary document;
(34) "woman" — a female human being of any age;
(35) "wrongful gain" — gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled;
(36) "wrongful loss" — loss by unlawful means of property to which the person losing it is legally entitled.

Section 3: General Explanations and expressions.
(1) Every definition of an offence shall be understood subject to the General Exceptions.
(2) Every expression explained in any Part is used in conformity with the explanation.
(3) Property in possession of a person's spouse, clerk or servant, on account of that person, is in that person's possession.
(4) Words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions.
(5) When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each is liable as if it were done by him alone.
(6) Wherever the causing of a certain effect by an act or omission is an offence, causing that effect partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence.
(7) When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally co-operates by doing any one of those acts commits that offence.
(8) Where several persons are engaged in the commission of a criminal act, they may be guilty of different offences by means of that act.

CHAPTER II — OF PUNISHMENTS

Section 4: Punishments.
The punishments to which offenders are liable are:
(a) Death;
(b) Imprisonment for life (remainder of natural life);
(c) Imprisonment — Rigorous (with hard labour) or Simple;
(d) Forfeiture of property;
(e) Fine;
(f) Community Service.

Section 5: Commutation of sentence of death or imprisonment for life.
Section 6: Fractions of terms of punishment — imprisonment for life reckoned as 20 years unless otherwise provided.
Section 7: Sentence may be wholly or partly rigorous or simple.
Section 8: Amount of fine, liability in default of payment.
Section 9: Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.
Section 10: Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, judgment stating doubt.
Section 11: Solitary confinement — not exceeding 3 months total.
Section 12: Limit of solitary confinement — not exceeding 14 days at a time.
Section 13: Enhanced punishment for certain offences after previous conviction.

CHAPTER III — GENERAL EXCEPTIONS

Section 14: Act done by a person bound, or believing himself bound, by law — not an offence.
Section 15: Act of Judge when acting judicially — not an offence.
Section 16: Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court — not an offence.
Section 17: Act done by a person justified, or believing himself justified, by law — not an offence.
Section 18: Accident in doing a lawful act — not an offence.
Section 19: Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm — not an offence.
Section 20: Act of a child under seven years of age — not an offence.
Section 21: Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding — not an offence.
Section 22: Act of a person of mental illness — not an offence if incapable of knowing the nature of the act.
Section 23: Act of person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will — not an offence.
Section 24: Offence requiring particular intent committed by intoxicated person — liable as if sober.
Section 25: Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by consent — not an offence.
Section 26: Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit — not an offence.
Section 27: Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person with mental illness, by consent of guardian — not an offence.
Section 28: Consent — not valid if given under fear of injury, misconception, mental illness, intoxication, or by person under 12.
Section 29: Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused.
Section 30: Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent when consent impossible.
Section 31: Communication made in good faith — not an offence.
Section 32: Act to which a person compelled by threats — not an offence (except murder and offences against State punishable with death).
Section 33: Act causing slight harm — not an offence.

Sections 34-44: Right of Private Defence.
Section 34: Nothing is an offence which is done in exercise of right of private defence.
Section 35: Every person has a right to defend his own body and property.
Section 37: No right of private defence against acts of public servants acting in good faith; right does not extend to inflicting more harm than necessary.
Section 38: Right of private defence of body extends to causing death in cases of assault causing apprehension of death, rape, kidnapping, acid attack.
Section 39: Right extends to causing any harm other than death in other cases.
Section 42: Right of private defence of property extends to causing death against robbery, house-breaking at night, mischief by fire, theft/mischief/house-trespass causing apprehension of death.

CHAPTER IV — OF ABETMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT

Sections 45-62: Covers abetment, criminal conspiracy, and attempt to commit offences.
Section 45: Abetment — instigating, engaging in conspiracy, or intentionally aiding.
Section 61: Criminal conspiracy — agreement between two or more persons to do an illegal act.
Section 62: Punishment for attempting to commit offences.

CHAPTER V — OF OFFENCES AGAINST WOMAN AND CHILDREN

Section 63: Rape — definition and elements.
Section 64: Punishment for rape — not less than 10 years, may extend to life imprisonment plus fine.
Section 65: Punishment for rape in certain cases (by police officer, public servant, armed forces, etc.) — not less than 10 years, may extend to life.
Section 66: Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state — not less than 20 years, may extend to death.
Section 69: Gang rape — not less than 20 years, may extend to life.
Section 70: Punishment for repeat offenders — life imprisonment or death.
Section 74: Sexual harassment — up to 3 years imprisonment.
Section 75: Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe — 3 to 7 years.
Section 76: Voyeurism — 1 to 3 years for first conviction, 3 to 7 years for subsequent.
Section 77: Stalking — up to 3 years for first offence, up to 5 years for subsequent.
Section 78: Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman — up to 3 years.
Section 79: Dowry death — not less than 7 years, may extend to life.
Section 85: Husband or relative subjecting woman to cruelty — up to 3 years plus fine.
Section 86: Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage.

CHAPTER VI — OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

Sections 98-122: Culpable homicide, murder, causing death by negligence.
Section 98: Culpable homicide — causing death with intention or knowledge.
Section 99: Murder — culpable homicide with specific intent or knowledge.
Section 101: Punishment for murder — death or life imprisonment plus fine.
Section 103: Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder — up to life imprisonment.
Section 104: Causing death by negligence — up to 5 years plus fine; 7 years for rash/negligent act.
Section 105: Abetment of suicide of child or person with mental illness — up to life imprisonment.
Section 106: Abetment of suicide — up to 10 years plus fine.
Section 109: Organised crime — death or life imprisonment with fine not less than 5 lakh.

Sections 115-146: Hurt, grievous hurt, criminal force, assault.
Section 115: Hurt — up to 1 year or fine up to 10,000 or both.
Section 117: Grievous hurt — up to 7 years plus fine.
Section 124: Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid — not less than 10 years, may extend to life, plus fine.

Sections 135-146: Kidnapping, abduction, slavery, forced labour.
Section 137: Kidnapping or abducting for murder or ransom — may extend to death or life imprisonment.
Section 141: Trafficking of person — 7 years to life imprisonment.

CHAPTER VII — OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

Section 145: Waging war against Government of India — death or life imprisonment.
Section 150: Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India — life imprisonment or up to 7 years plus fine.

CHAPTER X — OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN, CURRENCY NOTES

Section 178: Counterfeiting — up to life imprisonment or up to 10 years plus fine.

CHAPTER XI — OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

Section 189: Unlawful assembly.
Section 191: Rioting.
Section 196: Promoting enmity between groups on ground of religion, race, etc. — up to 3 years or fine or both.

CHAPTER XII — OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

Section 196-203: Various offences by public servants including disobeying law, framing incorrect documents, unlawfully engaging in trade.

CHAPTER XIV — OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE

Sections 225-254: Giving false evidence, fabricating false evidence, threatening to give false evidence, destruction of evidence.

CHAPTER XV — OF OFFENCES RELATING TO PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS

Sections 270-295: Public nuisance, negligent conduct, obscene acts.
Section 270: Public nuisance — fine up to 1,000 rupees.

CHAPTER XVII — OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

Section 301: Theft — up to 3 years or fine or both.
Section 302: Snatching — up to 3 years plus fine.
Section 306: Extortion — up to 3 years or fine or both.
Section 307: Robbery.
Section 308: Dacoity — minimum 7 years, may extend to life.
Section 312: Dishonest misappropriation of property — up to 2 years or fine or both.
Section 314: Criminal breach of trust — up to 3 years or fine or both.
Section 316: Cheating — up to 3 years or fine or both.
Section 317: Cheating by personation — up to 5 years or fine or both.
Section 318: Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among creditors.
Section 322: Mischief — up to 3 months or fine or both.
Section 327: Criminal trespass — up to 3 months or fine or both.

CHAPTER XVIII — OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKS

Section 333: Making a false document.
Section 334: Forgery — up to 2 years or fine or both.
Section 335: Forgery of record of Court or public register — up to 7 years plus fine.
Section 336: Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. — up to life imprisonment or up to 10 years plus fine.
Section 342: Falsification of accounts.

CHAPTER XIX — OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT, DEFAMATION

Section 349: Criminal intimidation — up to 2 years or fine or both; up to 7 years if threat of death or grievous hurt.
Section 351: Statements conducing to public mischief.
Section 354: Defamation — up to 2 years or fine or both.
Section 356: Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person — up to 3 months or fine or both.
